{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf2580
\cocoatextscaling0\cocoaplatform0{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-BoldOblique;\f2\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;
\f3\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica-Oblique;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red19\green19\blue19;
\red26\green26\blue26;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c0\c0\c0;\cssrgb\c100000\c100000\c100000;\cssrgb\c9804\c9804\c9804;
\cssrgb\c13725\c13725\c13725;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww19860\viewh13400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Introduction to 
\f1\i Metamorphosis of a death symbol: The transi tomb in the late Middle Ages and the Renaissance
\f0\i0  by Kathleen Cohen, University of California Berkeley Press, 1973
\f2\b0 \
\
Medieval tomb imagery was traditionally concerned with the expression of hope for salvation. The calm faces and ideal beauty of most thirteenth- and fourteenth-century European tomb figures clearly expressed confidence in God\'92s mercy and in salvation: \'93Deus cui proprium misereri semper et parcere.\'94 Canopies like those used above the heads of saints on cathedral portals were often placed above the heads of tomb effigies. The canopy, a symbolic arcade through which angels sometimes floated, was considered to be the open door to the world beyond, and thus served to place the transfigured dead on the threshold of eternity.\
\
In the last years of the fourteenth-century, a new and strikingly different type of sepulchral monument, the transi tomb, appeared in several places in Northern Europe. On these tombs the traditional idealized portrayal of the deceased was replaced by a gruesome depiction of the physical ravages of death. Early examples showed the corpse of the deceased in a variety of ways: as a figure completely swathed in a shroud, as an emaciated corpse with protruding intestines, as a shriveled body with skin drawn taut across its bony frame, and as a decaying corpse covered by snakes and frogs.\
\
During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries these early types spread throughout much of Northern Europe and new types were created. The emaciated transi was dominant in England, while in Germany and Austria, the corpse figure covered by frogs and snakes became prevalent. Enshrouded figures were used in northern France, Burgundy, England, and the Lowlands. Many French transis were shown riddled with worms. In addition, a new type developed in sixteenth-century France which portrayed the deceased as a handsome nude seen only a few hours after death, a striking contrast to the pitiful naked corpses of the earlier century.\
\
Transi figures were used on tombs in a variety of ways. On some tombs transis were carved at the bottom of large bas-reliefs of religious scenes such as the Crucifixion or Resurrection of Christ. On several German examples of this type small transi figures were placed at the bottom of elaborate coats of arms. In another variety, a life-sized transi comprised the sole motif, either engraved on the tombstone or carved in high relief on top of it. A third type of tomb contrasted a life-sized transi, or representacion de la mort, with a second life-sized effigy of the deceased, the representacion au vif. In England and at Brou both effigies were recumbent, with the living figure placed directly over the dead one. Ordinarily in France only the lower effigy, the transi, was recumbent, while the upper figure, the priant, was shown kneeling. Another variation contrasted the transi, representing the body, with a small praying figure representing the soul.\
\
The historical significance of the transi tombs and the various meanings they were intended to convey have not as yet been satisfactorily explained. Many early writers naively explained the transi as a literal portrayal of the body of the deceased as it looked sometime after death. Such interpretations, together with the imaginative stories that were apparently concocted ex post facto to explain the peculiarities of the transi images, can be dismissed without serious consideration. (Several legends were told about the striking transi of Frangois de la Sarra in La Sarraz, Switzerland. One legend stated that he died a violent death while hunting and that he fell into Lac de Joux. When he was found much later by his family he was covered with frogs and snakes which were then depicted on his tomb. [\'85] Charles Montvert gave another explanation for the figure, saying that he was represented thus on his tomb by his vassals who wanted to be avenged for his tyranny\'85) The view held by many modern critics is that the transi tombs were intended as memento mori for the living. Admittedly there are obvious physical resemblances between the corpse figures portrayed on the transi tombs and those used in popular representations such as the Dance of Death and the Triumph of Death. In addition, certain similarities exist between the inscriptions carved on the transi tombs and those used in connection with moralistic stories like the Legend of the Three Quick and the Three Dead. Both used, for example, the phrase \'93I was like you, and you will be like me.\'94 The memento mori image or inscription, however, had one essential purpose, and that was to remind the beholder of death and to urge him to behave morally. Such was not the traditional purpose of tombs, and it must be remembered that the transi was first and foremost part of a tomb. The essential purpose of a medieval tomb was the expression of hope for the salvation of the deceased, a purpose which was of concern to the dead, not the living. If one accepts the position that the transi tombs were intended as memento mori, then it must be assumed that the men who commissioned the tombs suddenly shifted their orientation from the traditional concern with the salvation of their own souls to the edification of the living. Such a reorientation is particularly unlikely in a period when expressions of concern for salvation often reached exaggerated proportions. Although the builders of the transi tombs adopted certain motifs from contemporary memento mori thinking, the majority of these tombs retained the traditional function of medieval sepulcharal monuments. The summary dismissal by so many modern writers of transi tombs as mere memento mori for the living is both inadequate and superficial.\
\
Transi tombs were, in fact, the result of a number of complex interrelated factors. These included traditional moralistic writings, the influence of the Black Death, contemporary memento mori imagery, contemporary funerary customs, the climate of anxiety generated by the conflict between the traditional ascetic demands of the church and the emergence of nationalism and the accumulation of great wealth, the attempt to humiliate the body in order to gain salvation, the desperate desire for prayers for the soul, the interest in alchemical symbolism, the contemporary representation of dead bodies, such as that of Adam, in connection with resurrection symbolism, and the influence of Neo-Platonic symbolic thought.\
\
Transi tombs were built from the late fourteenth century through the seventeenth by a variety of people living in very different historical circumstances. The transi was not a static image; rather, it reflected some of the dynamic changes that took place in religious, social, and intellectual life during this period. The study of the transi tomb is the study of a particular iconographic type chosen for different reasons and invested with different meanings by the men who used it.\
\
When transi tombs first appeared in the late Middle Ages, Europe was acutely aware of death as a result of the continued ravages of the Black Plague. The general familiarity with the physical facts of death brought about by the plague was of some importance in the genesis of transi tombs. Of much greater significance, however, was the pervading sense of anxiety of the period, to which the plague was but one contributing factor. This was a time of emotional extremes and of contradiction. Hair shirts were worn beneath gorgeous brocades and cut velvets. Lavish feasts and debaucheries were followed by excesses of piety. Bitterly fought struggles for power and wealth were followed by conspicuous acts of charity and the creation of innumerable charitable foundations. Men vacillated between displays of intense personal pride and abasement.\
\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 A good example of the extremes of extravagance and deprivation was Louis of Orleans. Although famed as a great lover of Iuxury and debauchery, he also had a cell in the common dormitory of the Celestines where he shared in the privations and duties of monastic life, rising at midnight and sometimes hearing five or six masses a day. In his will Louis had attempted to express his humility by requesting that after his death his servants cover his bed with ashes and dust. He went on to request that he be buried in the habit of the monks of the Celestines and placed directly into the bare earth in front of an altar in the chapel he had founded. One of the men who had himself so piously represented on his tomb as a humble corpse was far from modest and self-effacing when alive. John, Lord of Arundel was famous for both his lavish dress and his cruelty. His wardrobe contained no fewer than fifty-two new suits embroidered with gold thread. On his way to the French war he carried off sixty women and girls from a convent near Southampton to amuse his contingent during the campaign. Raping started immediately aboard the ships, but a storm came up in the Channel. In order to lighten the ship Arundel had all the women thrown overboard. Such emotional extremes were manifestations of the pervasive anxiety of the time.\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0
\cf0 \
One of the most important causes of this anxiety was the cleavage between the growing worldly interests of the late Middle Ages and the traditional demands of religion. With the burgeoning prosperity of the period the desire on the part of layman and cleric alike for economic gain, display, and power became stronger. However, this love of wealth and power conflicted with accepted moralistic teachings of the church. A conflict had long existed within the church itself between the ideal of the ascetic life, with its denial of worldly wealth and power, and the necessity of managing the immense wealth and power the church itself possessed. During the later Middle Ages, as the wealth of the church increased and its spiritual prestige lessened as a result of the Great Schism, this conflict sharpened. Many church administrators became more involved with the accumulation of wealth and with contemporary power struggles than with the development of spiritual values. A fifteenth-century German chronicler observed: \'93Alas, how many bishops abandon the cross for the sword! The bishops seek only temporal power: thus a religious spirit has become an exceptional phenomenon on our episcopal seats.\'94 \
\
On the other hand, many intensely religious men preached and wrote against such secular interests within the church, demanding a return to earlier ideals of renunciation of power and wealth. A further element of conflict arose from the fact that high ecclesiastical offices were often political appointments gained in the employ of national sovereigns rather than in the service of religion. Such was the case with Lagrange and Chichele, the first French and English ecclesiastics to commission transi tombs. Another English bishop who constructed a transi tomb, Thomas Beckington, Bishop of Wells, was said to have been awarded his bishopric as a result of services to the King, among them being his book on the right of the English kings to the crown of France. Beckington devoted the major portion of his energies to his service to the king rather than to the duties of his bishopric, even to the point of appointing a suffragan to carry out his ecclesiastical duties. The wealth and ostentation of many fifteenth-century prelates was noted by Jean Burtzbach, a contemporary chronicler: \'93We see advancing toward us our prelates puffed up with pride. They are dressed in the finest English cloth... Their hands, laden with expensive jewels, are proudly placed on the hips. They strut by on expensive horses followed by numerous domestics wearing brilliant liveries. They build splendid residences: there, among sumptuous decorations, they give themselves up to orgies. The goods of pious donors are dissipated on baths, horses, dogs, and hunting falcons.\'94 The worldliness of the bishops was also apparent in the fact that many of the bishops wore their armour on official occasions. \
\
In Germany the problems were even more pronounced where the worldly and often selfish interests of the German bishops were frequently the subject of bitter recrimination from the reformers.\'94 Johan von Sierck, the first German bishop to build a transi tomb, embodied some of the abuses of spiritual leadership in that country. Bishoprics were coveted possessions because of the vast revenues that accrued from them. Von Sierck became Archbishop of Trier after paying a large sum for the privilege, and then waged a long and bitter military campaign in order to take possession of his see.\
\
These were the men who commissioned the first transi tombs, proud and powerful, but also religious. The transi was one attempt to alleviate some of the anxiety felt by these men as a result of the conflict between their own pride and the traditional religious demand for humility. It was this conflict that motivated the choice of the horrifying motif of the transi for many fifteenth-century funerary monuments.\
\
During the sixteenth century the intense anxiety about the fate of one\'92s soul, so common in the fifteenth century, was gradually alleviated. This fact is apparent from the sharp decline after 1530 in the number of pious legacies which had been considered to be of value in saving the soul of the donor. By 1550 the number of such legacies had become negligible. This phenomenon was apparent not only in the Protestant countries, but all over Europe. The decline in legacies is but one indicator of the many vital changes that took place in European thought during the sixteenth century. Of particular importance for the transi tombs was the gradual spread northward from Italy of the new learning, the new artistic styles, and the concept of the glorification of individuals. The adoption of these ideas by the French was greatly accelerated as a result of the Franco-Italian wars of the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.\
\
The new ideas not only modified attitudes toward life during the sixteenth century, but, as Panofsky has shown, they also radically affected attitudes toward death and the commemoration of the dead: \'93It was precisely in its attitude toward the dead that the new epoch most vigorously asserted its \'91modernity\'92.\'94 Panofsky went on to characterize this change as a \'93rejection of Christian concern for the future in favor of pagan glorification of the past.\'94 In other words, during the sixteenth century the traditional Christian sepulchral expression of hope for the salvation of the soul was gradually supplemented or replaced on funerary monuments by the commemoration of the past deeds and worldly glory of the deceased.\
\
Despite the change in attitude expressed by so many sixteenth- century tombs, transi images retained their popularity. As a matter of fact transis were placed on the tombs of the powerful French monarchs Louis XII, Francis I, and Henry II, tombs which reflected the new Renaissance emphasis on the praise of the deceased\'92s worldly glory, as well as the political ambitions of the French monarchy. In view of the new context of the transis Claude Du Courtail\'92s interpretation of these transis as symbols of \'93absolute despair in which all is finished, the deceased no longer hopes, no longer thinks,\'94 is clearly invalid. A careful examination of the entire statement of the tombs of the French monarchs indicates that the meaning of the transi, which had been closely related to feelings of anxiety in the fifteenth century, gradually changed during the sixteenth to express the greater security of the period. The form of the transi remained while its context changed, and the changed context in turn influenced the meaning of the transi. The religious function of the transi in this new context must be considered in relation both to the traditional function of a Christian tomb which was the expression of hope for salvation and the new Renaissance idea of the tomb as a worldly commemoration. Only out of this juxtaposition did the new meaning emerge.\
\
The divergence of meaning associated with the transi figure is best illustrated by the two groups of tombs: those made for a group of high-ranking ecclesiastics during the fifteenth century, and those made for the French monarchs in the course of the sixteenth century. [\'85] The meanings given to the transi by these two groups were however not the only ones symbolized by the form; they merely formed the two poles. Other variations of meaning will be carefully considered such as the German predilection for placing snakes and frogs on the corpse, alchemical symbolism as related to the transi figure, and various resurrection symbols used with the transi.\
\
[\'85] The various elements involved in the tombs can be considered the pieces to a jigsaw puzzle. Certain pieces\'97particular historical facts and concrete monuments\'97are in our possession; unfortunately others are missing. More facts are known about certain tombs than others; similarly more is known of the lives of certain individuals who commissioned transi tombs than is known about others. I hope that by concentrating on those tombs about which the most can be discovered, it will be possible to assemble enough pieces of the historical puzzle of the transi to understand both its function and its meaning to men of the late Middle Ages and the early Renaissance.\
\
Fairly rigid criteria have been adopted in an attempt to separate the particular iconographic type of the transi from similar forms, but such strict limitations are necessary in order to define more sharply the problems presented by that type. I consider the transi to be a representation of the deceased as a corpse, shown either nude or wrapped in a shroud. It is thus different from the traditional type of funerary effigy depicting the deceased with eyes open, hands in an attitude of prayer, dressed in his official garments. This definition also distinguishes the transi from a type of sepulchral image especially popular in fourteenth-century Italy, that, although depicting the deceased as dead, showed him dressed in his regular garments. If eyes closed in death were adopted as a determining criterion rather than the shroud or the nudity of a corpse, then an entire group of often doubtful monuments would have to be included, for it is not always possible to determine whether a figure was represented as dead or merely as asleep. The transi must also be distinguished from the popular skeleton or corpse figures which represented an abstract personification of Death used, for example, in the Dance of Death or the Triumph of Death. The transi represented a specific dead individual and not Death itself.\
\
In the literature dealing with the sculpture of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries there is little uniformity in the terminology used to designate these corpse-like funerary figures. Older English writers used a variety of terms to describe them: cadaver, emaciated corpse, skeleton, and so forth. More recent English authors favored the term \'93gisant\'94 to designate these figures, although the most recent English publications employ the term \'93transi.\'94 The latter term is to be preferred in the interests of clarity, for \'93gisant\'94 is a French term meaning any recumbent sepulchral figure, whether intended to represent a living or a dead individual. Although a few French writers use this general term when speaking of the corpse figures others use the more specific \'93transi\'94 when referring to them.\
\
The noun \'93transi\'94 apparently derives from the Latin verb transire: trans: \'93across\'94; ire: \'93to go.\'94 From the twelfth through the sixteenth centuries the word transir was used in France in the sense of \'93to die\'94 or \'93to pass away,\'94 with the noun transi or transiz referring to the deceased. The term \'93transi\'92\'92 was used in a sixteenth-century contract for the tomb of Philibert of Chalons. Conrad Meit was instructed to make a figure of the prince, recumbent and rigid as \'93Ja portraiture d\'92un transsy et mort d\'92environ huit jours\'85\'94 The specific term \'93transi\'94 is a precise designation for these figures and should, I believe, be adopted generally by English writers in preference to the more general term \'93gisant\'94 which I will limit here to describe recumbent figures of the deceased dressed in regular or sacerdotal garments and represented as being alive, whether awake or asleep.\
\

\f0\b from Chapter 4, \'93The Corpse as a Symbol of Resurrection\'94 \

\f2\b0 In the tombs discussed thus far, the transi represented a symbol of contrition and humility, a device for extracting prayers for the soul of the deceased, or a memento mori to urge the living to good behavior. In the case of Frangois de la Sarra, the transi was very closely associated with a traditional resurrection symbol, the scallop shell. Other transi figures were also closely involved with resurrection symbolism. In these cases the transi, representing the specific individual in the tomb, was substituted for other corpse figures traditionally associated with the resurrection, or was combined with traditional symbols of resurrection within the total statement of the tomb. Before the appearance of transi figures, the image of a corpse as a symbol of resurrection was presented in four separate associations: as part of the language of alchemical symbolism; to represent the grave of Adam; to illustrate various verses from the Book of Job; and in association with the resurrection of Christ.\
\
\ul Alchemical Symbolism\ulnone \
\
Many alchemical philosophers were concerned less with the transmutation of gold than with the concept of eternal life, the regeneration of man, and his union with the divine. The famous scientist, philosopher, and alchemist Raymond Lully (1235-1315), referred in his writings to \'93the transmutation of the stone and of the spirit.\'94 Many writers on alchemy believed that the prime goal of alchemical research was the spiritual regeneration of man. In the Margarita Pretiosa, written in the 13308, Petrus Bonus of Ferrara discussed the relation of the philosopher's stone to the soul and the resurrection of the body:\
\
This art is partly natural and partly divine or supernatural. At the end of the sublimation there germinates, through the medium of the spirit, a shining white soul which flies up to heaven with the spirit. This is clearly and manifestly the stone\'85 It was through their knowledge of the art that the old philosophers knew of the coming of the end of the world and the resurrection of the dead. Then the soul will be united with its original body for ever and ever. The body will become wholly transfigured (glorificatum), incorruptible, and almost unbelievably subtilized, and it will penetrate all solids. Its nature will be as much spiritual as corporeal. When the stone decomposes to a powder like a man in his grave, then is that substance strengthened and improved, as after the resurrection man becomes stronger and younger than he was before.\'94\
\
The same process was couched in the allegorical religious terminology of the \'93Old Adam\'94 and Christ, the \'93second Adam.\'94 As a result of Adam\'92s sin, man\'92s body became impure: \'93After his fall he was driven into the corruptible elementated world, and nourished by corruptible elementated elements, which infected his past nature and generated disease and death.\'94 Adam\'92s flesh had to putrefy in order that Christ, the second Adam, might emerge incorruptible:\
\
For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive, for since by man came death into the world, by man also came the resurrection of the dead. For the first Adam and his sons rose from mortal elements, therefore that which had been composed had necessarily to decompose; but the second Adam, who is called the philosophical man, arose from pure elements and therefore passed over into eternity. For what consists of simple and pure substance remains incorruptible in eternity.\
\
Alchemical writers stressed that fact that the death and decomposition of the body (the alchemical ingredients) was a necessary prelude to resurrection. The body must \'93die, rot by putrefaction, and then it will regenerate in glory.\'94 This necessary death variously called the \'93negrido,\'94 the \'93black state of matter,\'94 or the \'93old Adam,\'94 was usually symbolized by a human corpse. In this black or dead state the processes of dissolution, calcination and separation were carried on. After this putrefaction came the \'93white state,\'94 out of which emerged the final product of the alchemical process, the philosopher\'92s stone or \'93lapis.\'94 The lapis was sometimes symbolized by a figure of the resurrected Christ: \'93the one that dies not and that brings the dead to life.\'94 On the spiritual plane the image of Christ symbolized the union of the soul and mind with the divine. Many of the alchemists used these symbols in the two distinct senses noted above: referring specifically to the alchemical process itself and to spiritual concepts.\
\
Such a double meaning was clearly applied by the Parisian alchemist Nicholas Flamel (d. 1418) to the symbols that appeared on his transi tomb. The tombstone, which Flamel himself prepared before his death, was decorated with two bas-reliefs and several inscriptions. In his will Flamel mentioned that he had prepared his tombstone and was keeping it at his house until it was needed. Guilhermy gives the history of the tombstone, including its use as a butcher\'92s chopping block. The upper register is carved with a bust-length figure of Christ holding the globe in one hand and making the sign of the benediction with the other. On either side of his head are depictions of the flaming sun and the full moon. He is flanked by St. Peter holding a key and book and St. Paul holding a sword and book. A long inscription listing Flamel\'92s numerous bequests given in return for prayers separates the upper register from the lower. In the lower register a nude transi of Flamel is depicted lying on a shroud.\
\
Certain iconographic peculiarities of this tombstone can only be explained in light of alchemical illustrations. The double meaning\'97both religious and alchemical\'97of the symbols on the tombstone can clearly be seen from Flamel\'92s own writing.\'94 The figures on Flamel\'92s tombstone are similar to those used on a funerary arch which he had erected for his dead wife in the popular Parisian Cemetery of the Innocents in 1399. Although this arch is no longer extant, drawings were made of certain of the figures, and Flamel himself gave an extremely detailed description of the figures and what they were intended to symbolize. The careful examination of the symbols of this arch together with Flamel\'92s explanation of those symbols provides the key to the meaning of his own tombstone.\
\
In the center of the arch was a representation of Jesus holding the globe accompanied by angels. On either side saints Peter and Paul presented kneeling figures of Flamel and his wife who held banderoles containing inscriptions. Along with these figures, which were a part of traditional Christian iconography, there were others which were not within the usual repertoire, including three small figures dressed in white, a black corpse (the alchemical \'93negrido\'94), and three furnaces. The three furnaces had been added, according to Flamel, \'93to show that I had thus done it three times [i.e., successfully transmuted mercury into gold] I caused to be depicted under the same arch three furnaces, like to those which serve for the operations of this work.\
\
Below were a series of small scenes from right to left: (1) two intertwined dragons; (2) a man and woman holding banderoles saying that man must come to the judgment of God: \'93Homo veniet iudicium Die\'94 and that day will be terrible indeed: \'93vere illa dies terribiliss eri\'94; (3) three figures in white representing the resurrection; (4) two angels with banderoles calling the dead to arise to the judgment of God: \'93Surrite mortui venite ad judicium.\'94 This banderole connected with the last picture (5) which showed a man wrestling with a griffin. On the very bottom row were pictures of a hand holding something on a string, the death of the Holy Innocents, a man with a sword, a kneeling figure, and finally a king with a sword accompanied by the inscription, \'93Comment les Innocents furent occis par le commendement de Roy Herodes.\'94\
\
In his testament Flamel told of his practice of alchemy: During his work as a scribe there fell into his hands in the year 1357 a mysterious book containing cryptic pictures and writings of Abraham the Jew. He studied the figures in the book and showed them to scholars. One, Anselm, a practitioner of physic and a student of alchemy, explained the figures to him, Hamel recalls how he tried in vain for twenty years to understand the symbols and work the formula, \'93In the end, having lost all hope of ever understanding those symbols or figures, I made a vow to God to demand their interpretation of some Jewish priest belonging to some synagogue in Spain. Taking up the pilgrim\'92s staff, he went to Leon where he found a converted Jew, a physician named Cahches, who deciphered the figures for him. When he returned to Paris he had the figures painted \'93upon the door of the chapel of James of the Boucherie, close by the one side of my\
house, where we are both painted [he and his wife] kneeling and giving thanks to God. For through the grace of God it was that I attained the perfect knowledge of all I desired.\'94 In the church of St. Jacques-la Boucherie on the left side of the Marivaux door was a figure of Flamel kneeling at the feet of St. James, with a gothic \'93N\'94 inscribed on the pedestal. The figure of Pernelle was represented on the opposite side, kneeling at the feet of St. John, with the pedestal bearing a gothic \'93P.\'94\
\
Flamel wrote that the figures painted on the arch could be interpreted in two ways, not only as a hieroglyphic presentation of the alchemical process, but also as \'93the mysteries of our future and undoubted resurrection. .. and the coming of good Jesus.\'94 He went on to give the alchemical symbolism for the various figures, paying great attention to the ideas of corruption and resurrection:\
\
\'93Matter is dissolved, is corrupted, groweth blacke and conceiveth to engender, for all corruption is generation, and therefore ought blacknesse to be much desired. .. . He that seeth not this blacknesse at the beginning of his operations, during the days of the stone, what other colour soever he see, he shall altogether fayle in the Maisterie. . .. Not putritie, he doeth not corrupt, nor ingender, and by consequence, the stone cannot take vegetative life to increase and multiply.... And this dissolution is called Death, Destruction... because the natures change their forme, and from hence are proceeded so many allegories of dead men, tombs and sepulchres. ... Others have called it putrefaction, corruption.... The water beginneth to thicken and coagulate, somewhate more, growing very black, like unto pitch, and finally comes the \'91body\'92 and \'91earth.\'92 This earth stinkes and gives a smell like the odeur of graves filled with rottennesse and with bodies as yet charged with their natural moysture...\'94\
\
[\'85]\
\
The figure of St. Paul was considered an alchemical symbol:\
\
\'93Why is St. Paul on the right hand of God, in the place where the custom is to paint St. Peter? To understand the alchemical meaning one must first know that \'91first agent\'92 which is the key to opening the gates of all sciences. . . . St. Paul is an allegorical figure, his sword is to do something to the man who kneels at his feet\'97his banderole says \'91Blot out all the evil which I have done\'92 [\'85]\'94\
\
The three small white figures symbolized not only the traditional body, soul, and spirit, but also the alchemical sun, moon, and mercury:\
\
\'93The three folk rising again, clothed in sparkling white represent the Body, Soul, and Spirit... . The sun and moon and Mercurye are raised again in this operation, are made elements of air, and whitened. ...We called the blacknesse Death\'85 we may call the whitenesse Life; which commeth not, but with and by a Resurrection... They are all white, so the blacknesse, that is death, is vanquished, and they\'85 are from henceforward incorruptible.\'94\
\
The figure of the resurrected Christ represented the finished work, the lapis:\
\
\'93Now see our King coming, crowned and raised again, which hath overcome Death, the darknesses and moistures; behold him in the forme wherein our Saviour shall come, who shall eternally unite into him all pure and cleane souls, and will drive away all impurity and uncleannesse, as being unworthy to be united to his divine body.\'94\
\
Even St. Peter and his key served as alchemical symbols:\
\
\'93Peter with the key in his right hand and his left hand to Pernelle represents the stone . . . which demandeth two things, Multiplication and a more rich Accoutrement. Saint Peter holding a key having powers to open and to shut, to bind and to loose; thus must multiply the budding and increasing natures.\'94\
\
Traditionally the symbols of the flaming sun and the moon, which Flamel identified as alchemical symbols, did not accompany the figure of Christ with the globe, but they did appear with him on Flamel\'92s tombstone. A similar sun and moon appear in conjunction with a crowned king holding a globe on an alchemical illustration in Leyden, an illustration which also contains other symbols found on Flamel\'92s tombstone: two figures holding keys and the nude corpse. In the manuscript these symbols referred to the alchemical process. Flamel explained the similar figures on the arch of the Innocents, Paris, as symbolizing both the alchemical process and the resurrection of man. Flamel\'92s own tombstone clearly carried the double meaning he ascribed to the symbols on the arch, and the alchemical aspects of this symbolism gave a new significance to the transi image. The transi figure on the bottom of Flamel\'92s tombstone refers to the alchemical \'93negrido\'94 which must become corrupt and putrefy before it can be purified and resurrected. With Flamel\'92s tombstone the symbolism of the transi image went beyond a mere humbling of the self and became a necessary step in the process of resurrection: the body must decay before it can become immortal and incorruptible.\
\
\
\
\

\f0\b \'93Early Christians Would Have Found the Met Gala Gaudy\'94 in 
\f1\i Hyperallergic,
\f0\i0  May 15, 2018, by Kristi Upson-Saia\

\f2\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The 70th\'a0annual\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.vogue.com/slideshow/met-gala-red-carpet-live-celebrity-fashion"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \strokec4 Met Gala}}\'a0once again exceeded expectations for over-the-top fashion, spectacle, and pageantry. The theme of this year\'92s ball was \'93Heavenly Bodies,\'94 with individual looks referencing papal garb, clerical vestments, saintly halos, angels, and icons.\
\
Last week, the companion exhibition,\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.metmuseum.org/exhibitions/listings/2018/heavenly-bodies"}}{\fldrslt 
\f3\i \cf4 \strokec4 Heavenly Bodies: Fashion and the Catholic Imagination}},\'a0opened to the public, showcasing a collection high-fashion inspired by Christian clothing, art, and architecture, alongside ecclesiastical vestments and accessories on loan from the Vatican. The common thread that ties together all the of these items is the elaborate ornamentation, meticulous fabrication, and lavish expense of the one-of-a-kind garments for which the Metropolitan Museum\'92s Costume Institute has come to be known.\
Although many\'a0\cf4 \strokec4 drooled over the red carpet looks\cf2 \strokec2 \'a0and are\'a0\cf4 \strokec4 awestruck by the exhibition\cf2 \strokec2 , some are complaining about what they see as the tastelessness \'97 and even offensiveness \'97 of the theme. Piers Morgan, for instance,\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-5703953/PIERS-MORGAN-Met-Islam-Jewish-themed-hell-break-loose-disrespect-religion.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \strokec4 criticized the Met}}\'a0for making light of a religion held dear by many.\
As a historian of early Christianity with a specialty in religious dress, I think that Christians of the past would praise the Met organizers, curators, and designers for highlighting the role dress has played in the history of Christianity, while \'97 along with contemporary religious critics \'97 snubbing the Met for particular choices that indeed would have offended their religious sensibilities.\
\
On the one hand, early Christians would agree with the Met exhibition and gala organizers about the importance of dress as a primary mode through which individuals have long expressed their religious identity, commitment, and piety. Across early Christian sources, moments of conversion or of taking monastic vows were regularly marked by dramatic changes in garb that visibly signaled one\'92s new identity as a person of faith. In the words of\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "http://www.ccel.org/ccel/schaff/npnf206.v.CXXX.html"}}{\fldrslt \cf4 \strokec4 4th\'965th\'a0century Christian writer Jerome}}, one\'92s appearance \'93put on display who one really was.\'94\
\
On the other hand, the particular form and pageantry of the garments on display at the Gala and the exhibition deviate markedly from those through which early Christians communicated their religiosity. First and foremost, early Christians dressed\'a0
\f3\i down
\f2\i0 , not\'a0
\f3\i up
\f2\i0 . In an effort to express disdain for worldly luxury and attachments, and to live rather in anticipation of the world to come, they forsook ornamentation, fineries, and elaborately decorated or dyed garments, and rather donned the plain and simple clothing of the poor. Fourth\'a0century Christian Demetrias, for instance, was\'a0\cf4 \strokec4 reported\cf2 \strokec2 \'a0to have cast aside her \'93valuable necklaces, costly pearls, and sparkling gems\'94 in favor of a \'93cheap tunic, which she covered over with an even cheaper cloak.\'94 Early Christians would thus find the pomp and circumstance of the Met looks unthinkable within the parameters of their standards of religious piety.\
\cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
\
\cf2 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec2 The monastic-inspired garb at the Gala and at the Met Cloisters galleries would have been particularly nonsensical for early Christians who vowed to live a life of simplicity and poverty as preconditions for wholehearted devotion to God. One of the first acts of a Christian entering a monastery was to exchange his or her personal attire for the standard uniform shared by every member of the community. Common clothing flattened distinctions of class and rank and cultivated equity among the monks. Monastics\'92 sartorial principles of commonality and community stand in sharp contrast with the Met\'92s high fashion statements that are instead prized for their rarity and that serve to enhance\'97rather than minimize\'97the distinction between classes: the celebrities and wealthy elite who don these extravagant designs and the ordinary people for whom such clothing is well out of reach.\
\
Finally, while in recent years men on the red carpet have begun to step it up, the Met Gala and exhibition are largely occasions to highlight women\'92s fashion. The featured designers firmly situate their creations through typically feminine forms, shapes, and ornamentation. Yet early Christian women monastics\'97who elicited controversy precisely for their repudiation of feminine identity and dress, preferring instead to dress in men\'92s garb\'97would have turned up their noses at such design choices. For women monastics, renouncing the world included a rejection of marriage and family. And since for them gender functioned only to define the partner of a married couple who fathered or mothered children, many ascetic women imagined themselves to have exceeded their femininity altogether, and they communicated this by dressing in men\'92s garb. Further, because virtue was masculinized and vice was feminized, their cross-dressing likewise communicated their extraordinary piety, superior to that given them by nature.\
\
Were early Christians tapped to curate the fashion for the Met exhibition, they would showcase painfully coarse tunics that inspired reflection on and penitence for the sinful state of humanity; they would cover every inch of their model\'92s body to inhibit viewers\'92 sexual arousal; and they would highlight menswear. Were they asked to style celebrities for the Gala, they would likely advise them to skip the red carpet, trading the fame to be gleaned from appearances alone for merit earned through mundane acts of charity.\'a0Such piety would surely amount to sacrilege in the eyes of fashion critics and paparazzi.\
\
\
\

\f0\b \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \'93Middle Ages Modern Is a New Aesthetic for Our Increasingly Medieval Times\'94 in 
\f1\i Clever (Architectural Digest)
\f0\i0 , December 19, 2022, by Dana Covit\

\f2\b0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf5 \cb3 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\outl0\strokewidth0 \strokec5 Last week, an early medieval burial site\'97since characterized as one of the most significant ever excavated in the UK\'97was\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.theguardian.com/science/2022/dec/06/medieval-female-burial-site-found-near-harpole-is-most-significant-ever-discovered-in-uk"}}{\fldrslt \ul discovered}}. Buried alongside its inhabitant from the Middle Ages was an intricate necklace of striking craftsmanship and complexity, made of wrought gold, garnets, and other semi-precious stones. It looked like something the popular jewelry brand\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://mondo-mondo.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul Mondo Mondo}}\'a0might make. I\'92ve been taking note of a rising design trend that spans the realms of jewelry, fashion, and art. If you ask me, a major shift is afoot, and it appears to be taking us down an enchanting path, one far away from the Nickelodeon-ified postmodern and Peeps colored palettes that somehow managed to curdle the\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.architecturaldigest.com/story/ultrafragola-mirror-dupes-impact"}}{\fldrslt \ul Ultrafragola}}\'a0in all its glory. (I won\'92t say good riddance, but I dare declare I\'92m ready to move on.)\
\
While I\'92ve never particularly wanted a\'a0canopy bed, lately I can\'92t help but wonder if I might sleep more soundly, wake more peacefully, and make love more ravishingly beneath sloping damasks and tousled in sumptuous silks. Blame the change of seasons if you must, but I chalk it up to more than just a brisk breeze. Whereas\'a0cottagecore\'97an undeniable reigning trend of the pandemic era\'97might have pointed to our collective longing for cozy and pastoral vibes, the emergence of this new aesthetic points to a tougher, more dramatic, and even mystical turn.\'a0\
\
The medieval era, often referred to as the Middle Ages or the Dark Ages, is bracketed between the fall of Rome in the fourth century through the beginning of the Renaissance in the early 16th century, a dizzying sprawl of time. To make matters even more expansive, it\'92s a particularly permeable period and genre within our collective imagination thanks to fantasy films and mythical tales. Where real medieval history ends and medieval myth begins can be hard for the average pleb to pin down. This intermingling impacts the way we experience and process a so-called medieval aesthetic. It might just be one of the few visual languages that someone without a background in art history can point out. (Suspending strict academic definitions, it\'92s a bit of a \'93you know it when you see it\'94 kind of thing.)\'a0\
\
Larisa Grollemond, a curator in the Manuscripts Department at the Getty Museum who recently \'a0contributed to an exhibit called\'a0\'93{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.getty.edu/art/exhibitions/fantasy/"}}{\fldrslt \ul The Fantasy of the Middle Ages}},\'94 notes that Medievalisms\'97the remixing of aspects of medieval art, architecture, and literature\'97are \'93a staple of our collective cultural knowledge.\'94 Thanks to representations of the period in film, television, video games, and a huge variety of other media, this world is \'93easy to reach for\'94 when we\'92re hungry for a new aesthetic. Within the collectible design space, a growing class of contemporary designers appears to be gravitating toward this world too, creating work that points to a longing for rawness and permanence, protection, and perhaps a bit of escapism.\
Metalwork, ornate detailing that evokes calligraphy and scrollwork, jewel tones, and darker woods\'97not to mention technologies borne of antiquity like forging, blacksmithing, and tin plating\'97are some prominent themes.\'a0Elsewhere, across fashion (look to the\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.instagram.com/p/Cl6b6Kvyhda/?hl=en"}}{\fldrslt \ul knit armored offerings from Isa Boulder}},\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.instagram.com/p/CkLAN-qK0NF/?hl=en"}}{\fldrslt \ul boned corsets from KNWLS}}, and\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.instagram.com/p/ClB_DfMMsmL/?hl=en"}}{\fldrslt \ul Paloma Wool\'92s ode to Joan of Arc}}) and jewelry (indie creators like\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://floatingworld.shop/"}}{\fldrslt \ul Floating World}},\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://gracefforde.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul Grace Fforde}}, and\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.clarkstudiojewelry.com/shop"}}{\fldrslt \ul CLARK}}), the mood is absolutely exuding Ren Faire realness.\
\
[\'85] Frank Traynor, the artist behind\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.instagram.com/theperfectnothingcatalog/"}}{\fldrslt \ul The Perfect Nothing Catalog}}, has developed a unique style of gem-encrusted tin-over-copper lattice work that transforms quotidian objects\'97lightswitch plates, bath faucets, and even trash cans and pepper mills\'97into relics of uncommon charm. Using collected shells, stones, and other glittering bits, the result is a Buried Treasure meets Met Cloisters meets\'a0
\f3\i Grimms\'92 Fairy Tales
\f2\i0 \'a0mashup. But for the New York\'96based designer\'a0Sophie Lou Jacobsen, whose wavy and colorful glassware can be spotted all over Instagram, the recent pivot toward silver and embroidered pieces articulates a new, or rather\'a0old, array of influences. \'93Personally, I\'92ve been feeling very drawn to Old World aesthetics,\'94 she explains in an email. \'93Rich colors, texture, layers, lots of ornamentation and decoration\'85astronomy and botany.\'94 \
\
[\'85]\
\
The furniture dealer Bianca Stillwell of\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://www.instagram.com/monte.vision/"}}{\fldrslt \ul Monte Visi\'f3n}}\'a0has been a bellwether of this vibe shift.\'a0\'93I\'92ve never been into Scandinavian, really, so I\'92m particularly excited to see this darker stuff creeping in,\'94 she says. \'93These days I am more into esoteric-leaning, darker, moodier colors and furniture. I really care about seeing a human touch to stuff. I love stone, I love steel, I love wood, I love Old World craft.\'94\'a0Whereas Scandinavian aesthetics are decidedly muted and light-of-touch, and postmodernism feels optimistic if a bit unhinged, medieval aesthetics are enveloping, immersive, and transporting. As we have reentered the world following a season of forced isolation, many of us have found our circumstances to be less than hospitable.\'a0\
\'93I associate medieval times with the tension between poverty and extreme wealth exacerbated by plagues, which created an overarching sense of darkness and helplessness,\'94 Sophie notes. \'93But when you look at the aesthetics and artifacts of that time they are often full of whimsy and fantasy.\'94\
[\'85]\
For Chase Biado and Antonia Pinter of\'a0{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK "https://a-history-of-frogs.com/"}}{\fldrslt \ul A History of Frogs}}, the element of fantasy is inextricable from their artistic vision. \'93We are deeply invested in the role fantasy plays in our daily lives, [and] we like to play with the past.\'94\'a0\
\
Their creations\'97most recently, an\'a0assemblage\'a0of bronze, brass, copper, and patinated aluminum sculptures and objects that are at turns lace-y, drip-castle-y, a bit primitive yet otherworldly\'97defy direct allegiance to a particular historical context. A History of Frogs has used evocative terms like Goblin Baroque and Marsupial Gothic that gesture toward, but ultimately reach beyond, a known history. They describe their work as \'93anti-modernism\'94 because it\'92s ornate and decorative, but also imperfect and idiosyncratic.\
But the draw to fantasy is more than a stylistic interest. \'93Our love of fantasy comes in part from a dissatisfaction with the world and a desire for more\'97more magic, more emotion, more imagination,\'94 Chase and Antonia explain. \'93[We] try to bring that into the world through the objects we make.\'94 Their use of metals also echoes a sentiment expressed by the other makers engaging with medieval aesthetics. \'93We have a desire to build something that is going to last a while, when so much seems disposable,\'94 they add.\
[\'85]\
If one thing is clear, it\'92s that medieval is as much a container of human imagination as it is a period of history. It embraces a plurality of longings, tastes, impulses, and inspirations: a \'93dirty-footed ideal\'94 for Traynor, \'93extravagance and beauty\'94 for Carson, a slow and intentional creative physicality untouched by industry for Lane. The Middle Ages Modern aesthetic is both darkness and magical thinking; of the past yet also of our own imagining. Perhaps, after a shared transit through hardship, we\'92re all planting the seeds of a more hopeful renaissance to come.
\fs32 \
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\fs24 \cf0 \cb1 \kerning1\expnd0\expndtw0 \outl0\strokewidth0 \
}